[main]
host = https://www.transifex.net

[django.core]
file_filter = django/conf/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/conf/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-admin]
file_filter = django/contrib/admin/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/admin/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-admin-js]
file_filter = django/contrib/admin/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/djangojs.po
source_file = django/contrib/admin/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/djangojs.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-admindocs]
file_filter = django/contrib/admindocs/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/admindocs/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-auth]
file_filter = django/contrib/auth/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/auth/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-comments]
file_filter = django/contrib/comments/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/comments/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-contenttypes]
file_filter = django/contrib/contenttypes/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/contenttypes/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-flatpages]
file_filter = django/contrib/flatpages/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/flatpages/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-formtools]
file_filter = django/contrib/formtools/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/formtools/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-gis]
file_filter = django/contrib/gis/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/gis/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-humanize]
file_filter = django/contrib/humanize/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/humanize/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-localflavor]
file_filter = django/contrib/localflavor/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/localflavor/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-messages]
file_filter = django/contrib/messages/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/messages/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-redirects]
file_filter = django/contrib/redirects/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/redirects/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-sessions]
file_filter = django/contrib/sessions/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/sessions/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en

[django.contrib-sites]
file_filter = django/contrib/sites/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_file = django/contrib/sites/locale/en/LC_MESSAGES/django.po
source_lang = en
